Hi there.
This is the De La Rue.
We now understand the benefit of garbage collection.
Let's now spend some time understanding GC algorithms itself.
There are two main challenges that need to be addressed.
First one is how would garbage collector identify dead objects?
But when such identification is being done, there's a good chance that some new objects get created
while some old objects get abandoned.
In such a scenario, the newly abandoned objects would also have to be reclaimed, and that would be
very difficult to do.
So to avoid this complexity, one thing to do would be is to pass the application for some time until
GC is performed.
But if we pause for too long, then it could affect the user experience.
And in case it's a web application, then website may not be responsive.
And that means we could lose customers.
So second challenge is to ensure that the application pass time is minimal.
So these are the two challenges, and let's see how our designers address them.
Let's look at the first challenge, which is about identifying the objects and, of course, reclaiming
their space to.
One algorithm for doing this is called us Mark and Sweep, which has two phases, Mark and Sweep.
Going by the name.
You may assume that Mark Face would involve identifying dead objects.
But it actually does the opposite, which is to identify all the live objects.
And the way it does this is it keeps track of some specific objects called as garbage collection routes.
And the garbage collection route could be something like a local variable and one of the currently executing
methods.
Or it could be a static field in a class that has been loaded.
On this GC route would be an object reference and not a primitive.
And during mach phase GC would traverse the object graph from each of the GC routes to identify all
live objects.
For example, let's consider this illustration.
Here there is a GC route which is referencing an object, and that object is referencing two or more
objects.
And those objects are referencing other objects, thus forming an object graph.
The ones emphasized in blue are reachable, while the ones in gray are no longer reachable.
That is, they were reachable at some point, but at this point of time they are out of scope.
So those unreachable objects are dead objects.
That is, they do not have any active references.
So in the mark phase, GC would traverse this object graph and would mark all the reachable objects
as live.
Next in the sweep phase, a sweep over the entire heap is performed to keep track of the heap areas
that are not marked as.
So that would be areas that are free and were unreachable by Marquis and so can be relocated.
Now earlier we said that when GC is performing its job, we need to post the application and here we
can see why that is needed.
For instance, if we do not pause the application, then after the mark phase, there may be some new
objects that get created and these new objects will obviously not be tagged as.
So in the swift face, GSA might wrongly assume that they are also unreachable and may reclaim space
occupied by them.
So life objects are being reclaimed here.
So the easiest way to fix this would be to pause the application.
Let's also look at another simple illustration.
Consider this hip area where the block shown in blue is considered allocated while the grey area is
considered free.
Now after performing GC, we may have something like this.
Now the blue areas indicate live objects that are marked as live by the Marquis and whatever is remaining
would be considered as garbage.
That is, it is free to be allocated to new objects.
So in the sweep phase, all the grey areas would be recorded in some way as free areas.
The problem with this algorithm is that memory is fragmented, that is free area is split across the
heap.
So if a new object has to be allocated space and none of the free areas are large enough to accommodate
it, then JVM simply cannot allocate space and would generate an out of memory error.
So to address this, there is another algorithm called Mark Sweep Compact.
And here the first two steps are identical to Marcus Veep.
But there's an additional compact step which moves all life objects to the beginning of the memory region.
So with this, there is no fragmentation issue and there's a greater chance of successfully allocating
large objects.
However, downside to this is that there would be an increase in past time for moving the live objects
and also updating all the corresponding object references that are referencing those live objects as
their memory addresses are now updated due to this relocation.
So that's the Mark Sweep compact algorithm.
There is also a third algorithm called Mark and Copy, which is very similar to Mark's compact approach
as they also relocate live objects.
And here's how it works.
This algorithm involves maintaining two memory regions, in this case A and B, A has some used memory
and also some free memory, and B is completely free.
Now after GC is performed, this is how it would be.
Basically, there are two things happening here.
First, after the mark phase, all live objects are marked as before.
So you would have fragmentation.
It is just that it is not shown here due to space constraints.
Now, during the copy phase, live objects are relocated to Region B.
A nice thing is they are all continuously allocated in Region B, so no fragmentation like in the case
of the second algorithm.
But an added advantage of mark on copy is that copy phase can happen simultaneously with the mark face,
that is as live objects are being marked.
They can also be moved to the second region.
So due to this, the application post time is shortened and in the next lesson we will see a very nice
example of Mark and copy, which involves a lot more details.
So those are the three algorithms.
And to address the second challenge, which is to reduce the past time, there is another algorithm
called generational collection, which would actually employ these core algorithms.
So it's another technique, but it would be using one or more of these algorithms.
And next, we will look at how generational collection works.
Thank you.